http://dnapolicyinitiative.org/resources/dna-databases-and-human-rights/#Expansion_in_uses:_familial_searching,_research_uses_and_counter-terrorism
"DNA Databases and Human Rights"
NOTES:
-partial dna matches can lead investigators to find family members of a dna sample if they are in a dna database.
-"If used routinely, familial searching could lead to significant abuses by allowing investigators or anyone who infiltrates 
    the database to track down the relatives of political dissenters or to pursue enemies or identify paternity and 
    non-paternity for personal, commercial or criminal reasons."
-DNA information of individuals may be indefinitely stored without consent, or only with consent to be used 
    in police investigations
-DNA databases collected for research require consent from the DNA carriers, but using police databases 
    to conduct genetic research would be a breach of this ethical guideline
-The UK can use their DNA database to track individuals regardless of whether or not they are suspected of a crime
-The UK has proposed collecting DNA and fingerprints for any offence, like littering
-There have been attempts to determine phenotypic traits like hair color and height to identify someone's DNA sample    
    if they are not already in a DNA database
-false matches between dna samples and database information can happen from laboratory error or by chance
-the presence of dna at a crime scene could be misinterpreted
-dna from a crime scene can become degraded or mixed with other dna, which would make it unreliable, but it could still
    end up being used for criminal investigations and identification
-in america and many other countries, ethnic minorities are disproportionately arrested amd prosecuted by law enforcement,
    which could mean that the human rights concerns of dna databases would affect them moreso
-increasing total dna database profiles for criminal investigation in england and wales did not lead to an increase
    in criminal prosecution of open cases
-storing dna data is costly
-currently most police dna samples are taken without consent through mouth swabs of detained suspects to crimes

How does the author’s lived experiences lead them to their point of view? 
    the Forensic Genetic Policy Initiative (FGPI) works to influence the ethical standards used by dna databases to find a 
    balance between effective law enforcement and protection of individual rights. FGPI collaborates with similar organizations
    that monitor developments in dna data use in the US and the UK. A focus on western countries could lead to a narrow
    view of the potential uses of genetic data, since most western countries operate under similar systems of governance. 
    Observing how stored genetic information is used in non-western countries could provide valiable insights to how different
    methods for dna storage and use can be beneficial or harmful.
How do the distribution of benefits and harms affect different people and society?
    collecting genetic data on individuals can be beneficial to law enforcement since it provides them a new tool to track and 
    identify suspects of known crimes. partial dna matches to family members of subjects can lead law enforcement to identify
    suspects, and the more genetic information is available, the more effective this method is. criminal prosecution in america
    as well as many other countries targets ethnic minorities, and if more minorities have their genetic data stored by law 
    enforcement, they will be more greatly affected by any harms brought about by abuses with dna databases. most dna samples
    collected by police are done without consent when criminal suspects are brought in for interrogation or when people are 
    arrested and booked.

https://www.nature.com/articles/5201114
Data storage and DNA banking for biomedical research: informed consent, confidentiality, quality issues, 
    ownership, return of benefits. A professional perspective
NOTES:
-dna banks can be used to identify genetic diseases of individuals
-several european countries have governing bodies that determine ethical guidelines for dna bank use
-the ASHG says dna banks and labs should only accept dna samples at the request of healthcare professionals
-many countries require written consent from dna sample subjects for research studies, but exceptions can be made
    depending on the anonymity of the collected samples
-consent to use dna samples may only be given for a specific research study, but this could be impractical since
    dna samples are often useful for many different studies. many regulating bodies for dna banking accept consent 
    to have dna stored long term for other research studies that could benefit from the genetic data
-many bodies say anonymous samples can be stored for use in research beyond what the sample was originally collected    
    and stored for
-because so much research takes place in the private sector, dna banks could sell genetic data to private enterprises

How does the author’s lived experiences lead them to their point of view? 
    Published by the European Journal of Human Genetics, a journal that publishes research papers and reports on topics related
    to human genetics. Their mission statement is to bridge the diverse viewpoints between different individuals and 
    institutions on human genetics. the four contributing authors of this article are either faculty of various academic
    institutions in canada and europe, in departments related to genetics or biomedical research.
How do the distribution of benefits and harms affect different people and society?
    requiring written consent from individuals to have their dna samples used in a particular study protects people from having
    their genetic info used without the subject knowing. genetic samples can be "anonymized" to further provide security to
    those who's dna is used in research, but this can also enable researchers to reuse or lend genetic data for different studies
    without explicit consent to do so. 

https://aeon.co/essays/social-genomics-can-combat-inequality-or-be-used-to-justify-it
Social genomics can be used to combat inequality or be used to justify it
NOTES:
-Erik Parens, the author of this article, is a researcher at a bioethics research institute
-he has left leaning political views
-genetics have been used to draw conclusions on the intelligences of different ethnic groups. ex: the bell curve (1994)
-these assumptions are used to justify inequalities faced by different people by saying that inequalities   
    are the result of people's different genetics, rather than their material conditions
-"left leaning" scientists consider using a "polygenic score" that estimates the effects of one's genetics on   
    their phenotype. this could be used to create precision medicine tailoredto someone's genetics
-past attempts to use polygenic scores to predict general intelligence have been unreliable due to 
    frequent false negatives: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3498585/
- Kathryn Paige Harden, new york times journalist, wrote in ‘Why Progressives Should Embrace the Genetics of Education" that
    a polygenic score model could be used to custom tailor education to the genetics of individuals
-this could lead to a new type of "separate but equal" institutions, where different ethnic groups receive different qualities
    of education under the justification that it is most beneficial to society to operate this way
-disparities in education level between different genetic groups could be used to justify the need for custom education,
    but could also be used to invalidate the historically vast disparities in socioeconomic status between different    
    groups, especially in america
-how would education even be tailored to someone's genetics? how could a scientific method for finding an individual's ideal
    mode of education be found and proven to work?

How does the author’s lived experiences lead them to their point of view? 
    Erik Parens is a researcher at a bioethics research institute who appears to have left-leaning political views.
    He is American and is aware of dominating views on genetics in America during the 20th century. Many of these views
    were right-leaning, including Richard Hermstein and Charles Murrays' "The Bell Curve" which has been used to defend
    neoliberal policies in america. Parens views on political ideology seem confined to the american/western conflict between
    "left" and "right" political views, while other countries not modeled after the west may have very different ideas of what
    left and right leaning politics looks like.
How do the distribution of benefits and harms affect different people and society?
    genetic research could be used to provide "custom" education to different genetic groups who may benefit from different learning
    environments. because there are no conclusive findings on if genetics plays a role in how genetics affects education,
    this seems problematic, especially given america's history of dividing education among ethnic groups (separate but equal 
    doctrine). Other groups have used genetics to determine how genes affect the material conditions of individuals or groups of
    people, and used assumptions drawn from research study findings to justify the existence of material differences among different
    people.

https://www.propublica.org/article/where-traditional-dna-testing-fails-algorithms-take-over
-Frank Thomas was charge for criminal possession of weapon and was sentenced to 15 years in jail
-“probabilistic genotyping” software program, algorithm that calculate the likelihood of a particular person's DNA is in a mixture
-Would not revel source code, so cannot determine if algorithm is bias or not

How does the author’s lived experiences lead them to their point of view? 
    Frank Thomas was found guilty of criminal possesion of a weapon, but he is appealing his conviction. Does this mean that the algorithm
    is bias and can be inaccurate?
How do the distribution of benefits and harms affect different people and society?
    This algorithm is beneficial to police because it is able to identify suspects from DNA found at crime scenes that 
    traditional DNA testing wouldnt be able to. This also gives prosecutors a powerful tool to gain evidence that would've been difficult
    with traditional DNA testing. However, the algorithm may be bias and can target a particular person over another base on their background, 
    race, culture, etc. There has been many cases where this algorith claimed to have identify the perpetrator of a crime and had led the perpetrator
    to be found guilty. The problem with this is that the company refuse to reveal their source code. The algorithm might be inaccurate or even bias.

https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/police-were-cracking-cold-cases-dna-website-then-fine-print-n1070901
How does the author’s lived experiences lead them to their point of view? 
    Angie Dodge was raped and murdered in Idaho falls. A man confessed to the crime, but Dodge's mother was convinced that the man wasn't the killer.
    So, law enforcements reopened the case and used GEDmatch in 2018 and found a potential suspect. After the collecting the potential suspect DNA, they 
    found a match to the DNA at the crime scene.
How do the distribution of benefits and harms affect different people and society?
    Police used to use a consumer DNA database to identify suspects. The database helped police solved more than 50 rapes and homicides cases.
    However, due to the public, the company providing the database had to change their terms of service to exclude law enforcement from searching
    through their database. This caused solving cases much harder for law enforcements. Allowing law enforcements to search through the database can
    help them catch the suspect a lot faster and also low the probablity of convicting an innocent person.

https://jme.bmj.com/content/26/4/266
assesses ethics of mandated genetic samples from a given population
would increase efficacy of dna evidence in solving police cases
violates consent of people and infringes on their freedom


*********************
*********************

    DNA search algorithms can be powerful tools for law enforcement in solving criminal investigations. However, the ethical 
concerns that arise from searching DNA databases have led to greater restrictions on their usage. 
    One such ethical concern is that the use of search algorithms in DNA databases could hold biases against different groups 
of people. The Forensic Genetic Policy Initiative (FGPI) states in their article titled "DNA Databases and Human Rights" that 
in many countries such as the United States, police can forcibly obtain DNA samples from detained individuals to help
solve criminal investigations. But in a country like the United States where the rate of police stops and incarceration 
are heavily biased towards racial minorities, this means that there is a disproportionate presence of DNA
samples from minorities in police databases. Although ideally, this wouldn't mean that search algorithms become biased towards
certain groups, because search algorithms and DNA sample handling isn't perfect, mistakes and false positives do occur, and
when they do they will be drawing from a skewed database and minorities could be more heavily affected by such errors. 
    There are also private DNA databases that police can use for investigations. Jon Schuppe, a journalist for NBC described 
what police can and cannot do with private databases. Consumers of DNA sampling services can choose whether or not to 
consent to having their DNA used for criminal investigations. Investigators can only use samples that the consumers have 
consented to giving, which has drastically reduced the efficacy of using these 
databases. Although having more utilization of private
databases could address the formerly mentioned concerns of bias in police databases, having greater access 
to private databases pose a privacy 
concern to consumers. 
    Margarita Guillen, a professor in legal medicine has proposed in an article for BMJ Journals the
possibility of a general genetic sampling of a population for law enforcement to use in investigations. While Professor
Guillen states that the general sampling methods would make DNA forensics highly effective in solving cases, she asserts that
this would
violate the freedom of individuals. She also states that in many countries like the US, there are already precedents set
for the restrictions of police in collecting biomedical information of non-suspects that would prohibit general dna sampling.

    

